README.md, before:

Intermediate PHP & MySQL
========================
   ![PHP](images/php.png "PHP")       ![MySQL](images/mysql.png "MySQL")     ![Symfony](images/symfony.png "Symfony")      

> This course is designed for students with a fundamental understanding of programming. 
> We will spend some time reviewing PHP basics, for students who are familiar with another language.
> We will then move on to commonly used linguistic constructs, talk about the web, learn Object Oriented principles,
apply some of the most commonly used design patterns, learn about the MySQL database server and learn Symfony.
> We will then spend the rest of the class working on a project, which will ultimately become a part of our portfolio.

Week 1 - [PHP Basics](syllabus/01 PHP Basics.md) [:notebook_with_decorative_cover:](syllabus/homework/01_count_types.md)

Week 2 - [Functions, Arrays & Strings](syllabus/02 Strings Functions Arrays.md) [:notebook_with_decorative_cover:](syllabus/homework/02_card_game.md)

Week 3 - [Web Programming](syllabus/03 Web Programming.md) [:notebook_with_decorative_cover:](syllabus/homework/03_countries_on_earth.md)

Week 4 - [Object Oriented Programming](syllabus/04 Object Oriented Programming.md) [:notebook_with_decorative_cover:](syllabus/homework/04_OO_card_game.md)

Week 5 - [Design Patterns](syllabus/05 Design Patterns.md)

Week 6 - [MySQL Fundamentals](syllabus/06 MySQL Fundamentals.md)

Week 7 - [Introduction to Symfony](syllabus/07 Introduction to Symfony.md)

Week 8 - [ACAShop - Capstone Project Kickoff](syllabus/08 ACAShop Capstone Project Kickoff.md)

Week 9 - In class coding and project completion

Week 10 - Continue in class coding for ACAShop, Student Q&A, the state of PHP and the job market.

#### Book
Although you are not required to purchase a book for this class, I strongly recommend you do.
The cookbook includes solutions to lots of common problems and is great for quickly referencing a working example on most web and CLI related topics in PHP.

[http://www.amazon.com/PHP-Cookbook-Solutions-Examples-Programmers/dp/144936375X](http://www.amazon.com/PHP-Cookbook-Solutions-Examples-Programmers/dp/144936375X)

#### Reference
- [Helpful Links](Links.md)
- [git Commands](GitCommands.md)

***

`Instructor`: [Samir Patel](http://samirpatel.me)

`Phone`: (512) 745-7846

`Email`: samir at austincodingacademy dot com

`Office Hours`: 30 minutes after class

Commit message:

Updated main page with required software

README.md, after:

Intermediate PHP & MySQL
========================
   ![PHP](images/php.png "PHP")       ![MySQL](images/mysql.png "MySQL")     ![Symfony](images/symfony.png "Symfony")      

> This course is designed for students with a fundamental understanding of programming. 
> We will spend some time reviewing PHP basics, for students who are familiar with another language.
> We will then move on to commonly used linguistic constructs, talk about the web, learn Object Oriented principles,
apply some of the most commonly used design patterns, learn about the MySQL database server and learn Symfony.
> We will then spend the rest of the class working on a project, which will ultimately become a part of our portfolio.

Week 1 - [PHP Basics](syllabus/01 PHP Basics.md) [:notebook_with_decorative_cover:](syllabus/homework/01_count_types.md)

Week 2 - [Functions, Arrays & Strings](syllabus/02 Strings Functions Arrays.md) [:notebook_with_decorative_cover:](syllabus/homework/02_card_game.md)

Week 3 - [Web Programming](syllabus/03 Web Programming.md) [:notebook_with_decorative_cover:](syllabus/homework/03_countries_on_earth.md)

Week 4 - [Object Oriented Programming](syllabus/04 Object Oriented Programming.md) [:notebook_with_decorative_cover:](syllabus/homework/04_OO_card_game.md)

Week 5 - [Design Patterns](syllabus/05 Design Patterns.md)

Week 6 - [MySQL Fundamentals](syllabus/06 MySQL Fundamentals.md)

Week 7 - [Introduction to Symfony](syllabus/07 Introduction to Symfony.md)

Week 8 - [ACAShop - Capstone Project Kickoff](syllabus/08 ACAShop Capstone Project Kickoff.md)

Week 9 - In class coding and project completion

Week 10 - Continue in class coding for ACAShop, Student Q&A, the state of PHP and the job market.

#### Environment
Prior to class, we will host workshops to help students setup their machines with required software.

- [VirtualBox](https://www.virtualbox.org/) - Create and run a virtual development environment
- [Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/) - Quickly provision a virtual machine
- [PHPVM](https://s3.amazonaws.com/austincodingacademy/boxes/phpvm.zip) - Configuration directives for virtual machine
- [PHPStorm](https://www.jetbrains.com/phpstorm/download/) - State of the art PHP IDE (we will be providing everyone student licenses)

#### Book
Although you are not required to purchase a book for this class, we recommend that you do.
The cookbook includes solutions to lots of common problems and is great for quickly referencing a working example on most web and CLI related topics in PHP.

[http://www.amazon.com/PHP-Cookbook-Solutions-Examples-Programmers/dp/144936375X](http://www.amazon.com/PHP-Cookbook-Solutions-Examples-Programmers/dp/144936375X)

#### Reference
- [Helpful Links](Links.md)
- [git Commands](GitCommands.md)

***

`Instructor`: [Samir Patel](http://samirpatel.me)

`Phone`: (512) 745-7846

`Email`: samir at austincodingacademy dot com

`Office Hours`: 30 minutes after class
