syllabus/05 Design Patterns.md, before:

05 - Design Patterns
=======================
> Now that we are comfortable with Object Oriented Programming, we will take a look at Design Patterns.
> Every piece of software is unique in what it does, there are however,  
some common patterns that have arisen that aim to solve recurring problems.
> "In software engineering, a design pattern is a general reusable solution to 
a commonly occurring problem within a given context in software design." -[google](https://www.google.com/#q=design+patterns)-

***

#### Factory
A factory is a class that creates objects for the wider application to consume. The output of the method is an object, with all its dependencies met.
Think of this pattern as an actual factory that makes cars. Lots of inputs are required to make a vehicle, but the output, is just a car.
The whole point of a factory is to provide it with the minimum amount of knowledge it needs to create a complicating object.

```php
// Create a car by calling a static method on CarFactory called getCar.
// This method takes two arguments, the make and model of the car you want the factory to build.
$ToyotaCorolla = CarFactory::getCar($make='toyota', $model='corolla');

// Object now has complex data
$ToyotaCorolla->getTorque(); // returns 128 lb·ft @ 4,400 rpm (174 N·m)
$ToyotaCorolla->getHeight(); // returns 57 inches

// Object can also have complex behavior
$ToyotaCorolla->rollUpWindows();
$ToyotaCorolla->setSpeed(65)->setDestination->('Austin')->setDriver('autopilot')->drive();
```

#### Singleton
A Singleton is a pattern that we should use when we want to ensure that there is only  
one instance of our class instantiated during the entire request cycle.
A great example of singleton in action is a DB class that connects a database  
and contains functionality to perform [CRUD](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Create,_read,_update_and_delete) operations.

Lets create such a class.
```php
/**
 * Class DBCommon without a singleton pattern applied
 */
class DBCommon
{
    /**
     * Database connection
     *
     * @var mysqli
     */
    protected $db;

    public function __construct()
    {
        $this->db = new mysqli(
            $host = 'localhost', $username = 'root', $password = 'root',
            $databaseName = 'acadb', $port = 3306
        );
    }

    public function query($sql)
    {
        // Run the actual query and return results...
    }
}
```

Here is how client code will use our class
```php
<?php

$DB = new DBCommon();
$DB->query('select * from user');
```

If I wanted to run another query in some other method, I would have to instantiate the class again
```php
<?php

$DB = new DBCommon();
$DB->query('select * from order');
```

As you can see, we will have to instantiate the DBCommon class every single time we need to run a query.
Every time we do that, the ```mysqli()``` class that we are assigning to the local protected property ```$db```,  
makes a socket connection to the MySQL database server.
This can quickly become resource intensive and is a very inefficient way to design an application.
A superior approach would be to make one connection to MySQL and reuse that connection for  
all queries we issue during the lifecycle of the request.

Let's take a look at how we can use Singleton to solve this particular problem.
```php
<?php

/**
 * Class DBCommon with private constructor and singleton pattern applied
 */
class DBCommon
{
    /**
     * Static instance of the instantiated object
     *
     * @var DBCommon
     */
    private static $instance;

    private function __construct()
    {
        $this->db = new mysqli(
            $host = 'localhost', $username = 'user', $password = 'pass123',
            $databaseName = 'acadb', $port = 3306
        );
    }

    /**
     * Get a singleton instance of DBCommon
     *
     * @return DBCommon
     */
    public static function getInstance()
    {
        if(!isset(self::$instance)){
            self::$instance = new self();
        }
        return self::$instance;
    }

    public function query($sql)
    {
        // Run the actual query and return results...
    }
}
```

We have a new ```private static``` variable called ```$instance```.
We made the constructor private, i.e. nobody should be able to instantiate this class directly.
If client code tries to instantiate the class directly, they would get an error that looks like this
```php
PHP Fatal error:  Call to private DBCommon::__construct() from invalid context in /DBCommon.php on line xxx
```

The only way to instantiate the class, is via a ```public static``` method called ```getInstance()```.
When ```getInstance()``` is called, we check if the local static property ```$instance``` has been previously set.
If the instance property has not been set, then we instantiate the class, set the static property and return it.
Note that we can instantiate a class from within ```getInstance()``` even though the constructor is private
because we are calling it from inside the class and not from the outside.

Here is how client code will use our redesigned class.
```php
<?php

// Instantiate via getInstance using Singleton pattern
$DB = DBCommon::getInstance();
$DB->query('select * from user');

// Same object returned, mysqli() is not called twice!
$DB2 = DBCommon::getInstance();
$DB2->query('select foo from bar');
```

### Front Controller
A front controller is a pattern that enables your application to have a single point of entry.
All the URLs and their associated parameters are rewritten by the webserver and handed off to one .php file for processing.

For example:
```
Url with no rewriting: http://foo.com/bar.php
Url with rewriting: http://foo.com/bar
```

Notice in the second example, we have no .php because /bar is an alias we generated.
[Apache](http://httpd.apache.org/) has a module called [mod_rewrite](http://httpd.apache.org/docs/current/mod/mod_rewrite.html)  
that allows you to perform this neat trick.

This is an example of an apache configuration snippet that redirects all URL patterns on your domain to ```index.php```
```bash
<IfModule mod_rewrite.c>
    RewriteEngine on
    RewriteRule    (.*) index.php    [L]
</IfModule>
```

The purpose of a front controller is to reduce the number of PHP files we create and to route all requests through one script.
Here is how we would implement a rudimentary front controller.
```php
<?php

// Ternary expression enables us to set a default value for $url if PATH_INFO is not set
$url = isset($_SERVER['PATH_INFO']) ? $_SERVER['PATH_INFO'] : 'homepage';

//Trim out leading slash from the path
$url = ltrim($url, '/');

//Evaluate known patterns
switch ($url) {

    case 'homepage':
        echo 'Show Homepage';
        break;

    case 'products':
        echo 'Show products';
        break;

    case 'blog':
        echo 'Show Blog';
        break;

    default:
        echo '404 Page not found!';
}
```

### Model View Controller
MVC is one of the most widely accepted ways of separating our application.
* M - Model
* V - View
* C - Controller

A request comes in from the web, using front controller, and hits a controller that executes code specific to the route.

The controller's sole responsibility is to acquire data from the request via the URL, ```$_GET``` or ```$_POST``` parameters 
and to instantiate any classes that are responsible for responding to that request.
The controller also calls methods on model classes to get data, that handler objects will need to fulfill the request. 
Finally, the controller will hand off or assign the data returned from handler classes to a view class for rendering.

View classes simply take data from the controller, figure out which template to render, assign the data to the template and generate some HTML.

Model classes are responsible for modelling your database and all the relationships contained therein.
Models should not contain any kind of business logic, and should only retrieve and persist data from and to the database respectively.

### Dependency Injection
Dependency Injection is a commonly used design pattern that allows us to build a decoupled architecture that promotes  reusable, testable code. 
Most objects have dependencies, a class you write may depend on other classes. Instead of instantiating those classes within the class, 
you should instead instantiate them outside the class, and **inject** them in. You can do this via *constructor injection* or via *setter injection*.

Define a few objects we need to build a house.
```php
<?php

class Door
{
    // Define properties and methods that define a door
}

class Window
{
    // Define properties and methods that define a window
}

class Floor
{
    // Define properties and methods that define floors
}
```

This is an example of how we would build a house **without** DI.
```php
<?php

/**
 * Class House does NOT use Dependency Injection
 */
class House
{
    public function __construct()
    {
        $Door = new Door();
        $Window = new Window();
        $Floor = new Floor();

        // Now use these objects to build your house
    }
}
```

As you can clearly see, the dependencies for building a house, among other things, are ```Door```, ```Window``` and ```Floor```. 
What we have done here is we instantiated the objects we needed for building a house in the ```House::__construct()```. 
This is not optimal, because if we needed to write a test case around this, 
we would somehow need to figure out how to make sure this ```House``` got the right kind of door, window and floor.

Let's take a look at the preferred way of solving this problem using Dependency Injection.
```php
<?php

/**
 * Class House that does use Dependency Injection
 */
class House
{
    /**
     * @param Door   $Door   Main door
     * @param Window $Window Living room window
     * @param Floor  $Floor  Bathroom floor
     */
    public function __construct(Door $Door, Window $Window, Floor $Floor)
    {
        // Now build your house with the objects that we injected in the constructor
    }
}
```

Notice that we type hinted the objects in the constructor to ensure that the objects that are being  
injected are of the type ```Door```, ```Window``` and ```Floor``` respectively. You don't have to do this,  
it just makes for self documenting, robust, readable code.

Setter injection is the same concept, but instead of passing in the dependency via the constructor,  
we pass it in via a setter. 
```php
<?php

/**
 * Class House that uses Setter Injection
 */
class House
{
    public function __construct()
    {
        // We are not injecting anything into the constructor
    }

    /**
     * @param Door $Door Main door
     */
    public function setDoor(Door $Door)
    {
        // Do something with the door
    }

    /**
     * @param Window $Window Living room window
     */
    public function setWindow(Window $Window)
    {
        // Do something with the window
    }

    /**
     * @param Floor $Floor Bathroom floor
     */
    public function setFloor(Floor $Floor)
    {
        // Do something with the floor
    }
}
```

Setter injection is typically used for optional dependencies. In our example if we didn't call ```setWindow($Window)```,  
the living room would be built without a window! 

***

#### Homework 05 - Ordering System

[Starter Code](homework/05_ordering_system.md)

We have been asked to create a basic ordering system to allow our employer to accept orders online. 

In order to achieve this effect, we will need to create an ```AbstractOrder``` class, with two children viz. ```Order``` and ```OrderComplete``` respectively.

```AbstractOrder``` will contain all common functionality to an order. 
```Order``` will contain all data and functionality necessary for an *active* or *ongoing* order.   
```OrderComplete``` is the object that gets instantiated once we have a completed order. 
 
In the real world, this data will come from the database, a topic which we will be covering next week.  
For now, your newly created order will be held in session. 

Each order will contain
- A ```Person``` object, that represents a person placing the order
- An array of ```Product``` objects as a protected property

The specific instructions for this system are provided in the starter code.  
Detailed instructions on how to implement this example have been excluded on purpose.

Project Notes:
- This project has a sparse amount of written direction to model a real development request
- Starter code contains class bare-bones class implementation 
- You will be using inheritance, and abstraction for the ```Order``` family of classes
- Factory will be leveraged to gather the appropriate order, depending on the state ie. *in progress* or *complete*
- When you place your order, assign it a unique orderId and hold on to that value in session
- The sytem should allow us to place multiple orders, all containing a unique number of products.

Commit message:

Changed 05 design patterns homework to simon says

syllabus/05 Design Patterns.md, after:

05 - Design Patterns
=======================
> Now that we are comfortable with Object Oriented Programming, we will take a look at Design Patterns.
> Every piece of software is unique in what it does, there are however,  
some common patterns that have arisen that aim to solve recurring problems.
> "In software engineering, a design pattern is a general reusable solution to 
a commonly occurring problem within a given context in software design." -[google](https://www.google.com/#q=design+patterns)-

***

#### Factory
A factory is a class that creates objects for the wider application to consume. The output of the method is an object, with all its dependencies met.
Think of this pattern as an actual factory that makes cars. Lots of inputs are required to make a vehicle, but the output, is just a car.
The whole point of a factory is to provide it with the minimum amount of knowledge it needs to create a complicating object.

```php
// Create a car by calling a static method on CarFactory called getCar.
// This method takes two arguments, the make and model of the car you want the factory to build.
$ToyotaCorolla = CarFactory::getCar($make='toyota', $model='corolla');

// Object now has complex data
$ToyotaCorolla->getTorque(); // returns 128 lb·ft @ 4,400 rpm (174 N·m)
$ToyotaCorolla->getHeight(); // returns 57 inches

// Object can also have complex behavior
$ToyotaCorolla->rollUpWindows();
$ToyotaCorolla->setSpeed(65)->setDestination->('Austin')->setDriver('autopilot')->drive();
```

#### Singleton
A Singleton is a pattern that we should use when we want to ensure that there is only  
one instance of our class instantiated during the entire request cycle.
A great example of singleton in action is a DB class that connects a database  
and contains functionality to perform [CRUD](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Create,_read,_update_and_delete) operations.

Lets create such a class.
```php
/**
 * Class DBCommon without a singleton pattern applied
 */
class DBCommon
{
    /**
     * Database connection
     *
     * @var mysqli
     */
    protected $db;

    public function __construct()
    {
        $this->db = new mysqli(
            $host = 'localhost', $username = 'root', $password = 'root',
            $databaseName = 'acadb', $port = 3306
        );
    }

    public function query($sql)
    {
        // Run the actual query and return results...
    }
}
```

Here is how client code will use our class
```php
<?php

$DB = new DBCommon();
$DB->query('select * from user');
```

If I wanted to run another query in some other method, I would have to instantiate the class again
```php
<?php

$DB = new DBCommon();
$DB->query('select * from order');
```

As you can see, we will have to instantiate the DBCommon class every single time we need to run a query.
Every time we do that, the ```mysqli()``` class that we are assigning to the local protected property ```$db```,  
makes a socket connection to the MySQL database server.
This can quickly become resource intensive and is a very inefficient way to design an application.
A superior approach would be to make one connection to MySQL and reuse that connection for  
all queries we issue during the lifecycle of the request.

Let's take a look at how we can use Singleton to solve this particular problem.
```php
<?php

/**
 * Class DBCommon with private constructor and singleton pattern applied
 */
class DBCommon
{
    /**
     * Static instance of the instantiated object
     *
     * @var DBCommon
     */
    private static $instance;

    private function __construct()
    {
        $this->db = new mysqli(
            $host = 'localhost', $username = 'user', $password = 'pass123',
            $databaseName = 'acadb', $port = 3306
        );
    }

    /**
     * Get a singleton instance of DBCommon
     *
     * @return DBCommon
     */
    public static function getInstance()
    {
        if(!isset(self::$instance)){
            self::$instance = new self();
        }
        return self::$instance;
    }

    public function query($sql)
    {
        // Run the actual query and return results...
    }
}
```

We have a new ```private static``` variable called ```$instance```.
We made the constructor private, i.e. nobody should be able to instantiate this class directly.
If client code tries to instantiate the class directly, they would get an error that looks like this
```php
PHP Fatal error:  Call to private DBCommon::__construct() from invalid context in /DBCommon.php on line xxx
```

The only way to instantiate the class, is via a ```public static``` method called ```getInstance()```.
When ```getInstance()``` is called, we check if the local static property ```$instance``` has been previously set.
If the instance property has not been set, then we instantiate the class, set the static property and return it.
Note that we can instantiate a class from within ```getInstance()``` even though the constructor is private
because we are calling it from inside the class and not from the outside.

Here is how client code will use our redesigned class.
```php
<?php

// Instantiate via getInstance using Singleton pattern
$DB = DBCommon::getInstance();
$DB->query('select * from user');

// Same object returned, mysqli() is not called twice!
$DB2 = DBCommon::getInstance();
$DB2->query('select foo from bar');
```

### Front Controller
A front controller is a pattern that enables your application to have a single point of entry.
All the URLs and their associated parameters are rewritten by the webserver and handed off to one .php file for processing.

For example:
```
Url with no rewriting: http://foo.com/bar.php
Url with rewriting: http://foo.com/bar
```

Notice in the second example, we have no .php because /bar is an alias we generated.
[Apache](http://httpd.apache.org/) has a module called [mod_rewrite](http://httpd.apache.org/docs/current/mod/mod_rewrite.html)  
that allows you to perform this neat trick.

This is an example of an apache configuration snippet that redirects all URL patterns on your domain to ```index.php```
```bash
<IfModule mod_rewrite.c>
    RewriteEngine on
    RewriteRule    (.*) index.php    [L]
</IfModule>
```

The purpose of a front controller is to reduce the number of PHP files we create and to route all requests through one script.
Here is how we would implement a rudimentary front controller.
```php
<?php

// Ternary expression enables us to set a default value for $url if PATH_INFO is not set
$url = isset($_SERVER['PATH_INFO']) ? $_SERVER['PATH_INFO'] : 'homepage';

//Trim out leading slash from the path
$url = ltrim($url, '/');

//Evaluate known patterns
switch ($url) {

    case 'homepage':
        echo 'Show Homepage';
        break;

    case 'products':
        echo 'Show products';
        break;

    case 'blog':
        echo 'Show Blog';
        break;

    default:
        echo '404 Page not found!';
}
```

### Model View Controller
MVC is one of the most widely accepted ways of separating our application.
* M - Model
* V - View
* C - Controller

A request comes in from the web, using front controller, and hits a controller that executes code specific to the route.

The controller's sole responsibility is to acquire data from the request via the URL, ```$_GET``` or ```$_POST``` parameters 
and to instantiate any classes that are responsible for responding to that request.
The controller also calls methods on model classes to get data, that handler objects will need to fulfill the request. 
Finally, the controller will hand off or assign the data returned from handler classes to a view class for rendering.

View classes simply take data from the controller, figure out which template to render, assign the data to the template and generate some HTML.

Model classes are responsible for modelling your database and all the relationships contained therein.
Models should not contain any kind of business logic, and should only retrieve and persist data from and to the database respectively.

### Dependency Injection
Dependency Injection is a commonly used design pattern that allows us to build a decoupled architecture that promotes  reusable, testable code. 
Most objects have dependencies, a class you write may depend on other classes. Instead of instantiating those classes within the class, 
you should instead instantiate them outside the class, and **inject** them in. You can do this via *constructor injection* or via *setter injection*.

Define a few objects we need to build a house.
```php
<?php

class Door
{
    // Define properties and methods that define a door
}

class Window
{
    // Define properties and methods that define a window
}

class Floor
{
    // Define properties and methods that define floors
}
```

This is an example of how we would build a house **without** DI.
```php
<?php

/**
 * Class House does NOT use Dependency Injection
 */
class House
{
    public function __construct()
    {
        $Door = new Door();
        $Window = new Window();
        $Floor = new Floor();

        // Now use these objects to build your house
    }
}
```

As you can clearly see, the dependencies for building a house, among other things, are ```Door```, ```Window``` and ```Floor```. 
What we have done here is we instantiated the objects we needed for building a house in the ```House::__construct()```. 
This is not optimal, because if we needed to write a test case around this, 
we would somehow need to figure out how to make sure this ```House``` got the right kind of door, window and floor.

Let's take a look at the preferred way of solving this problem using Dependency Injection.
```php
<?php

/**
 * Class House that does use Dependency Injection
 */
class House
{
    /**
     * @param Door   $Door   Main door
     * @param Window $Window Living room window
     * @param Floor  $Floor  Bathroom floor
     */
    public function __construct(Door $Door, Window $Window, Floor $Floor)
    {
        // Now build your house with the objects that we injected in the constructor
    }
}
```

Notice that we type hinted the objects in the constructor to ensure that the objects that are being  
injected are of the type ```Door```, ```Window``` and ```Floor``` respectively. You don't have to do this,  
it just makes for self documenting, robust, readable code.

Setter injection is the same concept, but instead of passing in the dependency via the constructor,  
we pass it in via a setter. 
```php
<?php

/**
 * Class House that uses Setter Injection
 */
class House
{
    public function __construct()
    {
        // We are not injecting anything into the constructor
    }

    /**
     * @param Door $Door Main door
     */
    public function setDoor(Door $Door)
    {
        // Do something with the door
    }

    /**
     * @param Window $Window Living room window
     */
    public function setWindow(Window $Window)
    {
        // Do something with the window
    }

    /**
     * @param Floor $Floor Bathroom floor
     */
    public function setFloor(Floor $Floor)
    {
        // Do something with the floor
    }
}
```

Setter injection is typically used for optional dependencies. In our example if we didn't call ```setWindow($Window)```,  
the living room would be built without a window! 

***

#### Homework 06 - Simon Says Sequences

[Starter Code](homework/05_simon_says.md)

We have been asked to create a web based implementation of simon says. We will be creating 4 buttons on a web page, numbered 1-4. 
Each button will have a different colored div underneath it.
Here is a scenario on how the game will be played:

 - In the beginning, the user will click on one button, and the first light will flash
 - The user then clicks on third button, and the first and third light will flash
 - The user then clicks on the second button and the first, third and second lights flash....
 
In short, each successive round will play back the results from the prior round, until the user makes a mistake in the sequence. 
If the user makes a mistake in the sequence, display the number of rounds they were able to play and the total time they took to play the game.
