syllabus/08 ACAShop Capstone Project Kickoff.md, before:

ACAShop - Capstone Project Kickoff
=======================
For our capstone project, we will be building an online store called ACAShop. 
Modern online shoppers have come to expect a certain experience. 
Here are some of the features we expect our store to have to keep those hard to please shoppers happy: 

#### Home Page
- We will be using [bootstrap](http://getbootstrap.com/) to layout our ```base.html.twig``` template
- Create a navigation menu that contains a few links to 
```/``` that is a link to the home page, 
```/catalog``` which is a link to our product catalog and 
```cart``` that will show all the items that the user has added to their cart
- Create a username and password login box, complete with a route that will handle user authentication
- We will need a corresponding ```User``` class that will inform the client if the user is valid i.e. in the database or not

#### Admin Area
- Create a route called ```/admin``` and map it to ```AdminController::indexAction()``` also create a corresponding default template
- The admin area is not secured, neither does it have any special navigation, all we want this to do is allow the admin to add a new product 
- The fields that we need in order to add a new product are ```name```, ```category```, ```price```, ```picture``` 
- Create a table called ```product``` with the corresponding fields contained on the form
- Allow for the admin to upload a product image, which will get stored in a folder on the server
- Store the relative location of the image in the ```product.picture``` field e.g ```images/products/baseball-bat.png```

#### Product listing
- Create a controller called ```ProductController``` with a default ```indexAction()``` that maps to a ```templates/Product/index.html.twig``` template
- Write a query to get all products from the database, return an array of ```Product```objects and hand those off to the template
- Loop through the results, in the template and display your products with an add to cart button 
- We will need a route ```add_cart``` and a controller ```CartController::addCartAction()``` to handle the adding of products to the user's shopping cart
- When the user adds an item, the items should be stored in session. All you need to store is the ```product_id``` and the ```quantity``` 

#### Shopping Cart
- The shopping cart should show all the items that the user has added to the cart
- If there are no items in the cart, display a message to that effect
- Allow the user to update the quantity of each item
- Allow the user to remove an item from their cart
- Create a **Checkout** button that maps to a route called ```/checkout```

#### Checkout
- For the checkout page lets create a controller called ```CheckoutController```
- Display two forms with a shipping address and a billing address
- We are not going to collect any form of payment information
- Display the order total on the checkout page
- Create a button called **Place Order** which will map to a route called ```/place_order```
- If the ```user.shipping_address_id``` field is filled, call the ```Address``` class with this Id as the constructor argument, set the ```address_type``` to *shipping* 
- Same concept applies for ```user.billing_address_id```

#### Place Order
- Create a controller called ```OrderController``` and a method called ```placeOrderAction()```
- The ```placeOrderAction()``` method will give the ```Order``` class the ```Product[]``` i.e. the ```Product``` array
- Create an ```Address``` class, and create a table called ```address```  
- The address table and the class will contain a ```address_type``` field, whose values are ```shipping``` or ```billing```
- Ensure that the shipping and billing options in the table are ```ENUM``` instead of just ```varchar``` or ```char``` values
- Create a record in the address table, store the ```address``` & ```address_type``` as ```shipping``` retrieve the ID of that record, 
- Store the Id in ```user.shipping_address_id``` for later retrieval if the user placed another order in the future. The same concept applies to billing address


* Create a shopping cart. The cart should allow the user to remove items, and update quantities.
* Allow users to create an account, or checkout as a guest
* Users can create an account before they checkout or during checkout.
* Users can login at any time to view a list of all orders they have purchased.
* Users can also update their personal information, shipping and billing addresses.
* After the user checks out, show a confirmation page with details about the order they just created.
* Create a simple sales report, showing what our sales numbers look like over time.

You have two choices for this particular project.
You can either be a lone ranger and work on it yourself, or you can pair up with another person.
If you do choose to pair up, we can help you structure your work so its more atomic and create a branch for you,

Commit message:

Added additional cleanup for capstone project

syllabus/08 ACAShop Capstone Project Kickoff.md, after:

ACAShop - Capstone Project Kickoff
=======================
For our capstone project, we will be building an online store called ACAShop. 
Modern online shoppers have come to expect a certain experience. 
Here are some of the features we expect our store to have to keep those hard to please shoppers happy: 

#### Home Page
- We will be using [bootstrap](http://getbootstrap.com/) to layout our ```base.html.twig``` template
- Create a navigation menu that contains a few links to 
```/``` that is a link to the home page, 
```/catalog``` which is a link to our product catalog and 
```cart``` that will show all the items that the user has added to their cart
- Create a username and password login box, complete with a route that will handle user authentication
- We will need a corresponding ```User``` class that will inform the client if the user is valid i.e. in the database or not

#### Admin Area
- Create a route called ```/admin``` and map it to ```AdminController::indexAction()``` also create a corresponding default template
- The admin area is not secured, neither does it have any special navigation, all we want this to do is allow the admin to add a new product 
- The fields that we need in order to add a new product are ```name```, ```category```, ```price```, ```picture``` 
- Create a table called ```product``` with the corresponding fields contained on the form
- Allow for the admin to upload a product image, which will get stored in a folder on the server
- Store the relative location of the image in the ```product.picture``` field e.g ```images/products/baseball-bat.png```

#### Product listing
- Create a controller called ```ProductController``` with a default ```indexAction()``` that maps to a ```templates/Product/index.html.twig``` template
- Write a query to get all products from the database, return an array of ```Product```objects and hand those off to the template
- Loop through the results, in the template and display your products with an add to cart button 
- We will need a route ```add_cart``` and a controller ```CartController::addCartAction()``` to handle the adding of products to the user's shopping cart
- When the user adds an item, the items should be stored in session. All you need to store is the ```product_id``` and the ```quantity``` 

#### Shopping Cart
- The shopping cart should show all the items that the user has added to the cart
- If there are no items in the cart, display a message to that effect
- Allow the user to update the quantity of each item
- Allow the user to remove an item from their cart
- Create a **Checkout** button that maps to a route called ```/checkout```

#### Checkout
- For the checkout page lets create a controller called ```CheckoutController```
- Display two forms with a shipping address and a billing address
- We are not going to collect any form of payment information
- Display the order total on the checkout page
- Create a button called **Place Order** which will map to a route called ```/place_order```
- If the ```user.shipping_address_id``` field is filled, call the ```Address``` class with this Id as the constructor argument, set the ```address_type``` to *shipping* 
- Same concept applies for ```user.billing_address_id```

#### Place Order
- Create a controller called ```OrderController``` and a method called ```placeOrderAction()```
- The ```placeOrderAction()``` method will give the ```Order``` class the ```Product[]``` i.e. the ```Product``` array
- Create an ```Address``` class, and create a table called ```address```  
- The address table and the class will contain a ```address_type``` field, whose values are ```shipping``` or ```billing```
- Ensure that the shipping and billing options in the table are ```ENUM``` instead of just ```varchar``` or ```char``` values
- Create a record in the address table, store the ```address``` & ```address_type``` as ```shipping``` retrieve the ID of that record, 
- Store the Id in ```user.shipping_address_id``` for later retrieval if the user placed another order in the future 
- The same concept applies to billing address
- Write order data to the ```order``` table, retrieve the newly created ```order_id``` 
- Create one record per ```Product``` in the ```order_item``` table

### Reporting
- Create a report to show all sales that were made by all people to date
- The report should rollup and show total sales
- Create a filter to allow the user to query a certain date range

#### Footnotes
- You can either be a lone ranger and work on it yourself, or you can pair up with another person.
- If you do choose to pair up, we can help you structure your work so its more atomic and create a shared branch for y'all
- All table names *should* be singular, unless you have a good reason to make it plural
